Five Aggregates
===============

Introduction
------------

From the perspective of Buddha-Dhamma, all things exist according to
their own nature. They do not exist as separate fixed entities, and in
the case of living creatures, they are not distinct and immutable
‘beings’ or ‘persons,’ which one could validly take to be a legitimate
owner of things or which are able to govern things according to their
wishes.[^1]

Everything that exists in the world exists as a collection of convergent
parts. There exists no inherent self or substantial essence within
things. When one separates the constituent parts from each other, no
self or core remains. A frequent scriptural analogy for this is of a
vehicle.[^2] When one assembles the various parts according to one’s
chosen design, one assigns the conventional term ‘wagon’ to the end
product. Yet if one disassembles the parts, no essence of a wagon can be
found. All that remains are the various parts, each of which is given
its own specific name.

This fact implies that the ‘self ’ or ‘entity’ of a vehicle does not
exist separate from its constituent parts. The term ‘car,’ for instance,
is simply a conventional designation. Moreover, all of those constituent
parts may also be separated into further parts, none of which possesses
a stable, fixed essence. So when one states that something ‘exists,’ one
needs to understand it in this context: that it exists as a collection
of inconstant constituent elements.

Having made this claim, the Buddhist teachings go on to describe the
primary elements or constituents that make up the world. And because the
Buddhist teachings pertain directly to human life, and in particular to
the mind, this elucidation of the constituent parts encompasses both
mind and matter, both mentality (*nāma-dhamma*) and corporeality
(*rūpa-dhamma*). Here, special emphasis is given to the analysis of the
mind.

There are many ways to present this division into separate constituents
of life, depending on the objective of the specific analysis.[^3] This
chapter presents the division into the ‘five aggregates’
(*pañca-khandha*), which is the preferred analysis in the suttas.

In Buddha-Dhamma, the human living entity—what is referred to as a
‘person’ or ‘living being’—is divided into five groups or
categories:[^4]

1.  *Rūpa* (corporeality; body; material form): all material
    constituents; the body and all physical behaviour; matter and
    physical energy, along with the properties and course of such
    energy.

2.  *Vedanā* (feeling; sensation): the feelings of pleasure, pain, and
    neutral feelings, arising from contact by way of the five senses and
    by way of the mind.

3.  *Saññā* (perception): the ability to recognize and to designate; the
    perception and discernment of various signs, characteristics, and
    distinguishing features, enabling one to remember a specific object
    of attention (*ārammaṇa*).[^5]

4.  *Saṅkhāra* (mental formations; volitional activities): those mental
    constituents or properties, with intention as leader, which shape
    the mind as wholesome, unwholesome, or neutral, and which shape a
    person’s thoughts and reflections, as well as verbal and physical
    behaviour. They are the source of kamma (‘*karma*’; intentional
    action). Examples of such mental formations include: faith
    (*saddhā*), mindfulness (*sati*), moral shame (*hiri*), fear of
    wrongdoing (*ottappa*), lovingkindness (*mettā*), compassion
    (*karuṇā*), appreciative joy (*muditā*), equanimity (*upekkhā*),[^6]
    wisdom (*paññā*), delusion (*moha*), greed (*lobha*), hatred
    (*dosa*), conceit (*māna*), views (*diṭṭhi*), jealousy (*issā*), and
    stinginess (*macchariya*). They are the agents or fashioners of the
    mind, of thought, and of intentional action.

5.  *Viññāṇa* (consciousness): conscious awareness of objects by way of
    the five senses—i.e., seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and
    feeling tangible objects—and awareness of mind objects.

There are several points to bear in mind in reference to the final four
aggregates, comprising the mental aggregates (*nāma-khandhā*):[^7]

**Perception** (*saññā*) is a form of knowledge.[^8] It refers to the
perception or discernment of an object’s attributes and properties,
including its shape, appearance, colour, etc., as well as its name and
conventional designations. For example, one knows that an object is
‘green,’ ‘white,’ ‘black,’ ‘red,’ ‘loud,’ ‘faint,’ ‘bass,’
‘high-pitched,’ ‘fat,’ ‘thin,’ ‘a table,’ ‘a pen,’ ‘a pig,’ ‘a dog,’ ‘a
fish,’ ‘a cat,’ ‘a person,’ ‘him,’ ‘her,’ ‘me,’ ‘you,’ etc.

Perception relies on the encounter or comparison between previous
experience or knowledge and new experience or knowledge. If one’s
current experience corresponds with previous experience—say one meets
someone familiar or one hears a familiar sound—one has ‘recognition’
(note that this is not the same as ‘memory’). For example, Mr. Jones
knows Mr. Smith. A month later, they meet and Mr. Jones recognizes Mr.
Smith.

If a new experience does not correspond with previous experiences,
people tend to compare it to previous experience or knowledge, looking
at those aspects that are either similar or different. They then
identify the object according to their labels or designations,
determined by the similarities and differences. This is the process of
perception—of designation and identification.

There are many layers to perception, including: perception in accord
with common agreement and understanding, e.g.: ‘green,’ ‘white,’
‘yellow,’ and ‘red’; perception in accord with social conventions and
traditions, e.g.: ‘this is polite,’ ‘this is beautiful,’ ‘this is
normal,’ and ‘this is abnormal’; perception according to personal
preferences and conceptions, e.g.: ‘this is attractive,’ ‘this is
admirable,’ and ‘this is irritating,’; perception based on multiple
factors (perception of symbolism), e.g.: ‘green and red represents this
university,’ and ‘two rings of the bell designate mealtime’; and
perception according to spiritual learning, e.g.: ‘perception of
impermanence’ and ‘perception of insubstantiality.’

There is both common, everyday perception and subtle, refined perception
(i.e., perception that is intricately connected to the other
aggregates). There is perception of matter and perception of the mind.
The various terms used for saññā, such as ‘recognition,’ ‘remembering,’
‘designation,’ ‘assignation,’ ‘attribution,’ and ‘ideation’ all describe
aspects of this aggregate of perception.

Simply speaking, perception is the process of collecting, compiling, and
storing data and information, which is the raw material for thought.

Perception is very helpful to people, but at the same time it can be
detrimental. This is because people tend to attach to their perceptions,
which end up acting as an obstruction, obscuring and eclipsing reality,
and preventing one from penetrating a deeper, underlying truth.

In this analysis, perception (saññā) is divided into two kinds: ordinary
perceptions, which discern the attributes of sense objects as they
naturally arise; and secondary or overlapping perceptions. The latter
are sometimes referred to by specific terms, in particular as
‘proliferative perception’ (papañca-saññā): perception resulting from
intricate and fanciful mental proliferation driven by the force of
craving (taṇhā), conceit (māna), and views (diṭṭhi), which are at the
vanguard of negative mental formations (negative saṅkhāra). This
division highlights the active role of perception and shows the
relationship between perception and other aggregates within mental
processes.

Consciousness (viññāṇa) is traditionally defined as ‘awareness of sense
objects.’ It refers to a prevailing or constant form of knowing. It is
both the basis and the channel for the other mental aggregates, and it
functions in association with them. It is both a primary and an
accompanying form of knowledge.

It is primary in the sense that it is an initial form of knowledge. When
one sees something (i.e., visual consciousness arises), one may feel
pleasure or distress (= feeling—vedanā). One then identifies the object
(perception—saññā), followed by various intentions and thoughts
(volitional formations—saṅkhāra). For example, one sees the sky (=
viññāṇa) and feels delighted (= vedanā). One knows the sky to be bright,
beautiful, the colour of indigo, an afternoon sky (= saññā). One is
delighted by the sky and wishes to admire it for a long, uninterrupted
period of time. One resents the fact that one’s view is obstructed, and
one wonders how one can find a place to watch the sky at one’s leisure
(= saṅkhāra).

[^1]: In Pali, one may refer to ‘things’ as phenomena (dhamma), elements
    (dhātu), or aspects of reality (sabhāva) The complete spelling of
    this third term is sabhāva-dhammā (from sa + bhāva + dhamma), which
    literally means ‘things that exist according to their own nature.’

[^2]: S. I. 135. (In ancient India this referred to a wagon; in modern
    parlance we may refer to this as a ‘car.’)

[^3]: The broadest division is into mind (nāma) and body (rūpa), or
    mentality and corporeality. The Abhidhamma texts prefer the
    threefold division of the mind (citta), mental constituents
    (cetasika), and the body (rūpa). If one compares this analysis to
    the five aggregates, one may equate the following: citta =
    viññāṇa-khandha; cetasika = vedanā-khandha, saññā-khandha, &
    saṅkhāra-khandha; rūpa = rūpa-khandha.

[^4]: See more details on the five aggregates in the appendix.

[^5]: The term ārammaṇa (‘object of attention’) refers to those things
    cognized by the mind by means of the six ‘doorways’ (dvāra), i.e.,:
    visual forms, sounds, smells, tastes, tangible objects, and mind
    objects (thoughts).

[^6]: The meaning of this important term upekkhā is often misunderstood.
    This term appears in the group of mental formations (saṅkhāra),
    where it is equivalent to ‘specific neutrality’ (tatramajjhattatā),
    and also in the group of feelings (vedanā), where it is equivalent
    to ‘neutrality’ (adukkhamasukha)—to neither-painful-nor-pleasant
    sensations.

[^7]: The following explanations are based on references from the Pali
    Canon as well as comparative references from the commentaries, in
    particular: M. I. 292-3; S. III. 87; [MA. II. 462]; SA. II. 291;
    Vism. 436, 452-3.

[^8]: The commentaries describe the following function and attributes of
    perception (saññā): its unique attribute is sañjānana (recognition;
    remembering). Its function is to establish a sign as a key for
    memory, so that in the future one knows that ‘this is
    such-and-such’; this function is similar to a carpenter who marks a
    piece of wood. Its result is an attachment to those established
    signs; this is similar to a blind man who touches an elephant and
    consequently identifies an elephant with that part of its body that
    he has touched. Its ‘footprint’ (padaṭṭhāna)—the object as it
    appears—resembles how a fawn sees a scarecrow and believes it to be
    a real human being (Vism. 462). In comparison to Western
    psychological terms, saññā encompasses ‘perception,’ ‘conception’
    (as ‘mental representation’), and ‘recognition,’ and to a certain
    degree, but not exclusively, to ‘memory.’
