Six Sense Spheres
=================

Introduction
------------

Although human beings are made up of the five aggregates, which can be
further subdivided into numerous subsidiary factors, generally speaking,
in everyday life, people do not directly engage with these aggregates.
Many of these component factors making up human life exist and function
without people’s knowledge, and even if they are aware of them, people
often do not give them much thought. In respect to the body, for
example, many physical organs function without the knowledge of the
person involved, who often does not care to know. People may only take
an interest in these functions when there arises some abnormality or
impairment. This is similarly the case in regard to mental factors.

People generally leave the study and analysis of the body as the
responsibility of medical scholars and biologists, and they leave the
study of the mind up to Abhidhamma scholars and psychologists. For the
majority of people, the importance or meaning of life centres around
their everyday engagement and interaction with the world. The importance
of life for most people lies in their relationship to the world.

This engagement or relationship can be divided into two parts or
systems, both of which rely on specific ‘doorways’ (*dvāra*; ‘channel’)
for making contact with the world:

1.  Cognition and experience of the world by way of the six ‘sense
    doors’ (phassadvāra; ‘doorways of sense contact’; ‘sense bases’):
    the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. These sense doors
    cognize various properties and attributes of the world, namely, the
    six sense objects (ārammaṇa): forms, sounds, smells, tastes,
    tangible objects, and mental objects.

2.  Behaviour and response to the world relying on the three ‘channels
    of action’ (kamma-dvāra): the body (kāya-dvāra), speech
    (vacī-dvāra), and mind (manodvāra), resulting in physical actions
    (kāya-kamma), verbal actions (vacī-kamma), and mental actions
    (mano-kamma).

Note that in the context of active engagement in everyday life, the term
dvāra (‘sense doors’) in the first system is most often referred to in
the scriptures by the term āyatana, which means ‘sphere of cognition’ or
‘path of cognition.’ For this reason, in this analysis here, the term
āyatana is used instead of dvāra.

